## Indigenous Empire

Though we’ll return to it in the next section, _Remapping_, it’s worth pausing to note the _historiographical_ significance of Comanche power (remember that _historiography_ is the study of historical writing). Applying the term this way contradicts the way many historians have conceptualized Indigenous peoples generally and Comanches specifically throughout time. Certainly, it challenges the _Five Myths_.

In their raiding, Comanches did not merely take advantage of the Spanish state’s weakness, but actively perpetuated it, creating a market for their bison products while securing a constant supply of horses and arms through raiding. In this period, Comanches, Kiowas, Navajos, and Apaches did not merely resist colonization, but pushed their domains southward, fueled by the exploitation of Spanish settlement (Reséndez, 2004; 47). However, one might equally see these settlements, equal parts dominated by Comanche raiding and dependent on their commerce, as satellites of the Indigenous empire - perhaps even as parts of Greater Comanchería.

Take a second to consider which of the _Five Myths_ are challenged by considering Comanchería to be an empire.
<br/>

<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
The effective resistance and indeed reversal of European-American colonization demonstrates that the expansion of those empires was neither constant nor inevitable. By building an effective and sustained economic system in the Far North, Comanches demonstrated a historical alternative to the European colonialism. (Myth 2, Myth 3)
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 2 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
The Comanches expressions of territoriality and sovereignty in the southern plains contradict the myth of uncivilized wilderness beyond the frontier. (Myth #4)
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 3 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Comanche ascendency ultimately resulted not only from raw power, but an ability to adapt and form their society around the opportunities afforded to them. Taking advantage of horses as a tool for warfare and transportation, as well as their seasonal migrations to secure their livelihood demonstrate a flexibility and change over time which is incompatible with notions of a singular, timeless, way of life. (Myth #1)
</p>
</details>
