## Peace

Greatly diminished by war and plague, Spanish officials in the early 1780s went to great lengths to secure peace with Comanches, who elected one of their leaders to pursue negotiation on their behalf.

By 1786, a deal was struck, granting the Comanches free access to New Mexican and Texan markets (in which they had been trading anyway), a significant supply of material goods from the state, including food, cigars, metal tools, and gear for horses, and a valuable ally against the Lipan Apaches, whom they had been in continual conflict with for decades. While Spain had temporarily secured its Northern frontier by recognizing Comanche sovereignty, the Comanches gained considerably from the peace, allowing them to expand into Apache territory with aid from the Spanish and Navajo, trading the resulting plunder across the northern provinces (Hämäläinen, 2008; 124-128)

Pekka Hämäläinen provides a depiction of the remarkable peace:

> _“Whereas in the 1760s and 1770s Comanches had treated New Mexico and Texas almost as colonial possessions and nearly destroyed both, coexistence and cooperation now seemed to define Comanche-Spanish relations. Things that only a few years before would have been unthinkable suddenly appeared almost commonplace. Spanish officials supplied guns, uniforms, and staffs of office to Comanche chiefs, who in turn pledged loyalty to their “father,” the king of Spain. Sons of Comanche elite lived among the Spaniards to learn their customs and language, and several Comanches accepted baptism in New Mexico. Spanish officials fed their Comanche allies during times of hardship and New Mexicans hunted bison on Comanche lands. Pedro Vial and other Spanish explorers blazed trails across Comanchería to connect the hitherto separated San Antonio and Santa Fe, and Comanches camped freely within the borders of Texas and New Mexico. Spanish-Comanche-Navajo war parties ranged from Texas to Nueva Vizcaya, turning Apachería’s expansion into contraction, and Nueva Vizcaya officials believed that the time was ripe to start missionizing the Comanches.”_
