## Violence and Retribution

As peace with Mexico withered, Comanche raids returned. At first, Mexicans experienced simple robbery - theft of horses and mules. When Mexican officials sent a counter-raiding party into Comanchería, killing dozens of Comanches, they could not have anticipated the escalating war that would follow (DeLay, 2008; 62-63). With the recent peace on the southern plains freeing Comanches from the obligations of domestic defense and providing allies in the Kiowas, raiding soon approached levels not seen in a generation, since the 1786 peace.

Brian DeLay writes:

> _“One episode from the campaign illustrates how quickly raids could poison relationships. On May 21, a portion of the eight-hundred-man force encountered a Mexican detachment of thirty-six soldiers near the Rancho de la Mula. The raiders raised a white flag and dispatched a captive to ask for peace, but the Mexican commander insisted on speaking to the Comanche leader first. When the captive returned to relay the message, additional Comanche warriors came into view. Spooked perhaps, or simply determined to seize their chance, the Mexicans fired a cannon loaded with ball and shrapnel. The astonished warriors, who had thought they enjoyed the protection of a formal parley, watched in horror as companions fell before the blast. The survivors rode off with their dead and wounded, slaughtering Mexican animals in their path._

> _“Thereafter the campaign took on a different quality. More than simply stealing animals and seizing captives, the raiders went out of their way to destroy what they did not want. They laid waste to the Hacienda de las Animas in early June, killing men, stealing horses and mules, sacking nine houses and burning others, and destroying all the storage bins of beans and corn they could find. When they finally withdrew, they took thirty-nine captive Mexicans with them. Most never saw their families again.”_ (DeLay, 2008; 69).
