## “Essential To Us, Useless to Her”: The Coming Wars

A decade before the Mexican-American War, the seeds of Mexican defeat were already sown. “How different the [US-Mexican] war might have been,” asked one newspaper, “had the frontier states not been abandoned to their luck! Mexico might have been an impregnable barrier of patriotism among the inhabitants” (DeLay, 2008; 297). Indeed, even in the midst of US invasion, nominal Mexicans throughout the Far North were too busy defending themselves from Comanche raids to form a unified front (DeLay, 2008; 284-285). Other factors, certainly, would contribute to the massive defeat solidified with the Mexican Cession - the transfer of half a million square miles of Mexico’s Far North - including US industrialization and internal division in the Mexican state. However, if New Mexico and Texas were “failed provinces” prior to the 1786 peace, they would be reduced to worse in the ensuing years, seeing raids more relentless and violent than any before (Delay, 2008; 214-215).

While Texas pursued its own independence, separating its fate from that of Mexico, New Mexico would experience patterns of neglect eerily similar to those 50 years before. New Mexicans had never truly achieved economic self-reliance, independent of lucrative trade with Comanches (Hämäläinen, 2008; 143, 241). In many ways, it remained a Comanche colony. When Mexico City failed to maintain the peace, the region lost not only its security, but also its means of subsistence. Though administrators in _Mexico City_ often spoke of a unified Mexican Nation, the problems of the Far North, crying out under the strain of Comanche raids, would never amount to national problems in the eyes of the central government. Certainly not until it was too late (DeLay, 2008; 142-143). Far off in Washington DC, US officials took note. One senator the described Mexican Far North in bleak terms: “essential to us, useless to [her],” a “wilderness uninhabited, save for bands of roving savages” (DeLay, 2008; 291).

Of course, much like western Georgia of the early century, Mexico’s Far North was not wilderness, but the land of sovereign Indigenous peoples. The limited imaginations of men in Washington could see Mexican weakness, but would vastly underestimate Indigenous strength, dragging the country into a costly, decades long war to subdue Comanches and others. This war would not be won on the battlefield - but we’ll get to that.

Nonetheless, even US colonialism would not erase the imprint of Comanchería on the land, and it certainly would not erase the Comanches. Annual performances of _Los Comanches_ attest to the former, while the remarkable persistence of Comanche identity in Texas, New Mexico, and Oklahoma demonstrates the latter.

The war of conquest which secured the lands of Mexico was easy. The war of identity and assimilation, in which Mexico itself never succeeded, would be much more difficult - and one in which Comanches still persist today.
