## Los Comanches

One of the ways New Mexicans express the persistence of these complex identities is through the folk play, _Los Comanches_. It probably originated in the late 18th or early 19th century, likely making it over 200 years old (Hämäläinen, 2008; 86). It is still performed to this day.

Click on the map to watch a video which features interviews with some of these people. In what ways does their performance of _Los Comanches_ contradict the _Five Myths_? Are you surprised?

<br/>
<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Los Comanches’ blend of multiple, supposedly disparate cultural traditions contradicts Myth #1, violating the idea of a singular, timeless Indigenous identity. Featuring a combination of Catholic symbols and Comanche dance, all the while speaking English amidst the landscape of the American Southwest, the play demonstrates how Comanche identity has persisted, evolved, and adapted over time in many forms. Moreover, the interviewee challenges a popular notion that his Comanche identity is based solely on his genetic heritage, an idea which sometimes underlies racist notions of Indigenous inferiority. Pay attention to how he explains his connection to Comanche culture.
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 2 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
By demonstrating the persisting threads of Comanche identity in New Mexico, Los Comanches disproves the inevitable decline of Indigenous peoples implied by Myth #2. 
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 3 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
By displaying the multiple cultural traditions which preceded the United States in the Southwest, _Los Comanches_ undermines the myth of the uncivilized frontier, Myth #4.
</p>
</details>
<br/>
