## Comanches Mythologized

_Remapping_ can mean a lot of things. In one sense, it can involve literally redrawing maps which have made over time. In another sense, it might include the reordering of thoughts and ideas about a given thing, on a purely conceptual level.

In this section, we will attempt to do both, drawing on the extensive journey we have taken through the mythology of US expansion. In previous sections, I have asked you to identify these _5 Myths_ in practice, as well as engaging with their logic more deeply to find ways in which they are contradicted by history. In this section, we will dig deeper into the debunking process, drawing on now familiar concepts as well as the _Five Cs_ of historical analysis. As we will see, these map closely to the _Five Myths_.

First, a review. In _The “Frontier”_ we saw how the rigid borders asserted by US states like Georgia often failed to capture the realities of Indigenous sovereignty. We also saw how Anglo-American perceptions of an uncivilized frontier were regularly subverted by the Indigenous peoples who lived beyond it. In _Los Comanches_, we saw how even more generous concepts of Indigenous territoriality often fail to account for the complex patterns of loyalty, influenced by trade and warfare, which disrupted the ability of Mexico to create and extend a singular national identity within its borders. Ultimately, this contributed to the conquest of the Far North at the hands of the United States. Throughout this narrative has been a continual thread of Indigenous subversion of Anglo-American expectations and a constant assault on the _Five Myths_.

In this section _Remapping_, we crystalize these concepts, taking the point of view from Comanchería. We will consider how Comanches adapted their society to life on the plains, surrounded by foes, and nonetheless built an empire which lasted a century. We will consider how this way of life, recovered through “remapping” Comanche society, facilitated their rise, while forming a unique identity based on their environment - one which ignorant Anglo-American could describe only as “savage.” Finally, we will see how these same factors would cause their eventual decline.

Perceptions of “savagery” are closely related to the singular, primitive societies envisioned by _Myth #1_. These perceptions sometimes persist to the present day, which we can see by once again delving into the practice of _historiography_, in order to understand how the history of history impacts the common perceptions of Comanches today. To do this, we will engage critically with the work of Joe Rogan. Who ever said historiography was boring?
