## Comanche Livelihood

Unless we understand these bases of Comanche society - horsemanship, buffalo hunting, raiding, and trading - we not only cannot explain the critical points in their history, from growth, patterns of war and diplomacy, to their decline, but we’re also blind to the conditions which determined their actions. Like Gwynne or contemporary American onlookers, we might be tempted to ascribe these things to their particular “savagery” or to supposedly inevitable forces like manifest destiny (_Myth #3_).

Again, follow the strategy of characterizing a statement using the _Five Cs_, then engaging that logic to debunk it. Which of the _Five Cs_ does _Myth #3_ relate to?

<details><summary>Answer (click to show)</summary>
<p>
I take Myth #3 to be a statement about contingency. By describing US expansion as inevitable, manifest destiny ignores the many ways in which the past could have turned out differently. 
</p>
</details>

Given this way of thinking about manifest destiny, how might we use the facts of Comanche history to debunk the myth?

<details><summary>Answer (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Recall that it was the Comanche alliance with Kiowas and peace with Apaches and Osages, (and later Cheyennes and Arapahos) that reoriented Comanches from ambivalent about the unprofitable peace with Mexico to the full scale assaults which preceded US invasion. Though the precise players would shift in the ensuing years, it was peace on their northern border, far removed from European-American persuasion, which allowed Comanches to so aggressively and boldly pursue the raids which brought New Mexico and Mexico’s Far North to the breaking point. We might imagine an alternative history where this peace did not occur, allowing Mexico to more effectively incorporate its northern provinces. Alternatively, imagine that Mexico had maintained the generous diplomacy which had made Comanches allies in the 1780s, presenting a united front against US invaders. That the US-Mexico border was ultimately drawn where it was is a direct consequence of Comanche power.
</p>
</details>
