## Decline

Comanche life on the plains would continue all but unchanged into the 1870s. Supported by the continuation of illicit trade in Texas and with buffalo herds still more than sufficient, Comanches had little incentive to comply with Anglo-American efforts to convert them to agriculturalists. Only on the heels of the bloody Civil War would Anglo-Americans resort to the total warfare which they had wielded against the Confederacy just years before. 23 years after the Mexican cession in which the US had vowed to subdue the Comanches, they remained entirely frustrated in these efforts (Hämäläinen, 2008; 333).

The situation now intolerable to Texans, still victims of persistent raiding, the US Army launched an unprecedented campaign into Comanchería in 1872, seeking to deprive the Comanches of their very means of livelihood. Ambushing a Comanche camp, they seized and slaughtered whatever livestock they could, burning the camp and taking captive some 100 of the group’s women and children. Left destitute, deprived of their families, and facing winter with none of their supplies, many of the remaining Comanches moved to the reservation (Hämäläinen, 2008; 334-335).

Despite Comanches’ exclusive treaty rights to the buffalo of the southern plains, the US Army then released buffalo hunters into the heart of Comanchería’s herds. While in the 1780s the number of buffalo killed is estimated to have been just 25,000 per year, by 1873 it’s estimated that 2,000 of the animals were slaughtered each day. Numbers of buffalo which could once have supported every person on the plains for a year were now being slaughtered in a fortnight. Impoverished by the hardship of the previous winter, the remaining Comanches soon retired to the reservation. The end of the once great southern herd would come by the end of 1874 (FWS, n.d.).
