## Cultural Collapse

Much like the Cherokee, the Comanches had come to flourish precisely because of the adaptations which they had made to their environment. Southeastern peoples did this through generational knowledge - “where the fish ran, where the best soils were located, where to hunt, and which plants to utilize for medicine, food, fiber, and dye, knowledge that was essential to their survival” (Saunt, 2020; 196-198). Comanches and other plains people adapted to life on horseback, relying on buffalo herds which Indigenous peoples had cultivated for centuries (Dunbar-Ortiz, 2014; 28). Comanche society was built around the geography of the plains. And with the destruction of the plains ecology came the destruction of Comanche society.

Many Indigenous peoples would face poverty on reservations, competing for scarce resources which were unfamiliar to them. Societies and cultures which had been built around their homelands suddenly left them ill-equipped for the life imposed on them on the reservation. This forced change in lifestyle showed the other side of removal. Darker still than forced migration, the US government was willing to embrace eradication when removal failed. The forced submission of the Comanches would demonstrate a willingness to wage total war, striking at the very ecological worlds of Indigenous peoples who challenged US expansion. Behind the humanitarian, but deeply racist language of “civilizing” Indigenous peoples, was always the implicit threat of extrermination, should they not wish to be “civilized.”
