## Conclusion

These peoples’ stories do not end in 1875, but this one must. The path forward for the Comanche Nation, as for many Indigenous peoples, has been difficult, requiring as much adaptability and resilience as in any of the history we have seen, but it is no less important than the days of empire. I encourage you to seek out that history elsewhere, as it too is inextricably linked with the history of US colonialism.

Today the Comanche Nation has an elected government, an administrative state, and a unified national identity. However, these concepts are not necessary for recognizing their inherent sovereignty, territoriality, and persisting culture in Texas and New Mexico. Meanwhile, the footprint of Indigenous peoples on US history looms large. From the expansion of slavery to the Civil War and Mexican-American War, the course of these events is simply inexplicable without the actions and experiences of Cherokees and Comanches. These groups, among others, defined the field on which US history unfolded, and played no small part in defining the very boundaries which the country has to this day.

In closing, I leave you with an address given by Comanche Chairman, Wallace Coffey. I encourage you to watch the other videos from this series, produced by the National Museum of the American Indian and preserved on Youtube (you can find a link on the next slide).

Though I have no answers for this prompt, consider how the content aligns with or challenges your expectations. Do you still have traces of the _Five Myths_ in your own thinking? How will you engage with the past going forward, to challenge the myths which you still believe?

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/wQyKWeN9qH4" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
