While Comanches are rarely remembered for their huge role in shaping Southwest history, they are more often remembered for something else. Indeed, the violence of Comanche raids, especially in the mid-19th century, has long defined their portrayal, inside and outside of academia. Even as their strength eclipsed the Mexican state, to the minds of non-Indigenous Americans to the east, the unrelenting effectiveness of Comanche raiding could serve only as evidence of their particularly uncivilized, or “savage” character (DeLay, 2008; 281). Of course, this means little, as the perceived weakness of Indigenous peoples elsewhere had been leveraged as evidence of the same (Saunt, 2020; 27).

However, there’s no getting around the fact that the violence seen in New Mexico in the 1830s-1840s was particularly brutal, on a scale which is not sufficiently explained by economic exploitation. Instead, Comanches during this period would go out of their way to inflict pain, even at their own expense (DeLay, 2008; 116-117). While Comanche violence in the raids of the 1830s-1840s is historical fact, it has nonetheless provided the basis for wild generalization of their society.

As a starting point for remapping, watch the following interview, conducted by the popular podcaster Joe Rogan, about S.C. Gwynne’s book on the Comanches in the mid-19th century. Note that Gwynne is not a historian by training, but a journalist. See if you can detect evidence of the _Five Myths_ in what he says. On the next slide, we will apply our knowledge of Comanche history to begin to debunk these myths - feel free to start thinking about how we might do that. Find my observations below.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JMWPP-vXzhQ" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<br/>
<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Almost immediately, Gwynne invokes the frontier. Though not a fallacy in and of itself, his word choice, describing it as “savage” closely mirrors arguments which were used to assert the absence of civilization on the plains. If he means violent, he could use that word instead. He elaborates on this concept around the 3 minute mark, where he invokes the idea of frontier society representing freedom and limitlessness, based on a perceived failure of Indigenous peoples to develop their environments (Myth #4). 
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 2 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Gwynne, much in the same vein, describes what he takes to be the “golden rule” of plains peoples. Not only does he generalize the culture and habits of plains peoples, but he also appears to describe these cultures as static and unchanging. In other words, “timeless” (Myth #1). By juxtaposing this image with the European civilization of “Newton” and “Leibniz,” Gwynne all but explicitly links the violence of these societies to their supposedly primitive character. It’s not clear whether Gwynne is agreeing or merely repeating when he says “Native Americans in general,” but extending this characterization to all Indigenous groups in the Americas would clearly demonstrate this further.
</p>
</details>
<br/>
