## The 5 Cs: Understanding Claims

On the previous slide, I identified two myths, _Myth #1_ and _Myth #4_, embedded in Gwynne’s discussion of Comanche history. To better understand the kinds of arguments he is making, we will apply the _Five Cs_ of historical analysis, which are as follows:

- Change Over Time: This skill, perhaps the simplest, involve the ability to recognize how some things change between time and place. The ability to recognize these variations is foundational to our ability to ask deeper questions, such as: _What might have caused the change?_ _How might these changes make us think differently about history?_
- Context: This skill requires considering how the broader spread of history frames an event. For example, we considered how removal was not a simple, one-off policy decision, but a long, drawn out debate which was fueled by and facilitated the lucrative expansion of the Southern slave economy. You might think this context fundamentally changes how we ought to think about removal.
- Causality: This skill answers questions of _why_ things happened. Combined with context and change over time, we can build up and break down arguments about why history unfolded the way that it did.
- Contingency: Often seen as the most difficult of the skills, contingency requires understanding the vast chains of causes and effects which were necessary to produce a given outcome. To say something is _contingent_, is to recognize that the future is never pre-determined, but dependent, at least partially, on the forces of states, environment, and even individuals.
- Complexity: This skill often involves the breaking down of simple, sometimes national narratives. While it might be easy to generalize the history of the United States into a simple process of expansion, the reality is that at every step there were complex identities and interests on all sides. Whether in the towns of the Southwest borderlands or with those opposing expansion in the halls of Congress, complexity challenges our notions of a single, unified narrative.

We can also see the _Five Cs_ as a way of classifying different _kinds_ of historical statements. Based on these descriptions, which historical thinking skill relates most closely to the _5 Myths_ invoked by Gwynne?

<br/>
<details><summary>Myth #1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
I see Myth #1 as a statement about change over time. By implicitly plotting progress as a 1-dimensional concept, ranging from “savagery” to “civilization” and putting plains peoples on the savagery side, Gwynne advances the idea that these peoples’ ways of life had insufficiently progressed, intentionally or not (in another interview, he describes them as “living in the stone age”). A telling moment is his use of the phrase “since forever.” By reducing Indigneous ways of life to their supposed lack of civilization, Gwynne depicts these cultures as unchanging.
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Myth #4 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
I see Myth #4 as a statement about complexity. As we have seen, the frontier thesis, advanced by Frederick Jackson Turner, is a convenient narrative of US expansion that allows for the erasure of Indigenous peoples and other groups who populated the supposed “wilderness.” While Gwynne does not go so far as to ignore these confrontations (clearly), he nonetheless appeals to the idea of “free” and “limitless” land, in direct opposition to the realities of Comanche sovereignty. This simplification allows for the greater significance of conquest to be ignored, as well as the way that Comanche society facilitated their dominance and effective resistance.
</p>
</details>
<br/>
