## Debunking Myth

Now that we understand the _kinds_ of claims that characterize these myths, we can use our knowledge of history to effectively debunk them.

Given what we’ve said about Gwynne’s use of the myths so far, if we take his notion of “savagery” (_Myth #1_) to be a claim about the change of Indigenous plains societies over time (or lack thereof) what historical evidence have we come across that would refute this myth?
<br/>

<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
On one hand, we can simply look to the vast diversity of Indigenous societies to demonstrate how these peoples, far from being primitive or underdeveloped, created societies uniquely adapted to their circumstances and environments. While for Cherokees in the 19th century, this meant a primarily sedentary lifestyle, based on an extensive knowledge of the region’s ecology, Comanches at the same time had adapted to a highly mobile, mounted lifestyle which provided them with food and mobility on the wide open plains.
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example #2 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Equally important, we can examine how the kinds of behaviors Gwynne identifies, which he claims characterized plains peoples “since forever” were actually situational. Rather than an immutable part of Comanche character, we’ve seen how the violence that Gwynne defined only narrow periods of their history (1760s-1780s, 1830s-1840s), and was often proportional to the scale of conflict. If extreme violence in warfare is to be seen as an indicator of “civilization,” the kind of tactics employed by the United States, including the deliberate infliction of suffering and targeting of non-combatants, ought to be equally suspect (DeLay, 2008; 280). Nonetheless, we typically recognize these tactics, even if we accept their moral *badness*, to be situational actions, rather than a fundamental reflection of Europeans as a society and race. 
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Bonus (click to show)</summary>
<p>
As a side-note I am not aware of a factual basis for Gwynne’s claims about captives on the plains. Comanches are frequently documented to have taken captives as hostages, for trade, and for negotiation such as with the United States (Kavanagh, 1996; 75, 83, 177, 400).
</p>
</details>
<br/>
Likewise, what historical evidence might refute the idea of free land, wrapped up in _Myth #4_?
<br/>
<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Acknowledging the ways that Comanches and other plains peoples shaped and improved their environments, such as through the construction and enforcement of marked borders, the development of roads systems to organize their territories (Barr, 2011; 12, 43), and through practices of ecological management (Dunbar-Ortiz, 2014; 45-46). To large extent, it was Indigenous peoples who created this environment in the first place - using fires expand the very plains on which they lived, thereby growing the range of buffalo, a major food source and economic staple, all the way to modern New York and Georgia (Dunbar-Ortiz, 2014; 28). While Gwynne and others might imagine a free and open frontier, the reality was that settlers were entering the deliberately crafted pastured of sovereign Indigenous America. 
</p>
</details>
