## Forgetting and Misremembering

For all our discussion of Comanche centrality to the course of US history, Gwynne and the popular imagination often forget, or misremember the significance of these actions. Why is this?

For one, Comanche history has seldom been written by Comanches. _Myth #1_ shows us how non-Indigenous people looking in on Indigenous peoples tend to see a homogenous, primitive society, even in the face of powerful peoples demonstrating sophisticated methods of organizing and mobilizing. In contrast, scholarship based directly on Indigenous knowledge, such as oral histories, has long been sidelined as mere “alternative” history (Montgomery & Severin, 2020; 196).

At another level, Indigenous peoples are often excluded from national narratives for the mere fact that they do not appear important. Recall that we debunked this notion at the end of section two, by demonstrating how Indigenous actions were necessary to explain the course of US history. By situating ourselves from a Comanche frame of reference, perhaps we can get a better view of what else these narratives leave out.

Before we move on, I’d like to on this argument by bringing in another one of the _Five Cs_. Out of these concepts, which one characterizes the claim of _Myth #5_?

<details><summary>Answer (click to show)</summary>
<p>
I take Myth #5 to be a statement about context. Specifically, that the context of Indigneous sovereignty, resistance, and removal, is not an important framework for understanding US history. 
</p>
</details>

Given this knowledge, how might we refute _Myth #5_?

<details><summary>Answer (click to show)</summary>
<p>
By interpreting Myth #5 as a statement about context, we can show that bringing in the history of Indigenous peoples produces a very different image of US history, as compared to the myth of the naturally and inevitably expanding frontier, in which expansion was a deliberate choice, which often faced opposition from Indigenous and non-Indigenous people alike. The impact of this decision, from the expansion of slavery, to the US Civil War and Mexican-American War, demonstrate that this framework explains important things about that history.
</p>
</details>
