## Introduction

Welcome the _Remapping Comanchería_. This project explores the continuing history of the Comanches. We will see that this history is inextricably intertwined with the history of settler-colonialism in North America.

For a brief introduction to the Comanche world, watch the following video. See if you can find two examples of how Comanches adapted their way of life to their unique circumstances. You can see what I found beneath the video.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MRXXvm-zKTY" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<br/>
<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
- Comanches used horses to enhance their ability to hunt and secure food for their people
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 2 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
- Comanches used horses to give them an advantage in warfare
</p>
</details>
<br/>

Not all Indigenous peoples adopted the horse, but for Comanches in the 19th century it was a central part of daily life. While we probably know that settler-colonialism deeply impacted the way that Indigenous peoples lived, we sometimes fail to acknowledge the the ways in which that impact went the other way. While this project is centered around Comanches, it is equally a history of the United States. To understand what happened on the Southwest plains in the 19th century, we first need to know something about how the US came to be there, the goals that drove them into conflict with the Comanches, and the experiences that shaped that conflict on both sides.

Just as Comanches changed their way of life as a result of contact with Europeans, contact with Indigenous peoples likewise defined the course of US history, from the very moment of its founding.

(Click the arrow in the bottom right to move forward)
