Here, we see the consequences of Indigenous peoples repeatedly being denied the opportunity to contribute to the national narrative, articulated in classrooms, pop culture, and political rhetoric. It is this omission which allowed me to take a collegiate level US history course and remain ignorant of the many nuanced ways in which Indigenous people formed that country.

I more precisely characterize this ignorance with what I call the five myths of Indigenous peoples in US history:

1. Indigenous societies were somehow primitive and incompatible with a post-contact world
1. Indigenous population decline was therefore inevitable and irreversible
1. The United States was destined to expand across North America, independent of the Indigenous civilizations they replaced (manifest destiny)
1. The process of settling this supposedly free, uncivilized land explains the course of American development (the Turnerian frontier)
1. And, therefore, studying Indigenous peoples is unnecessary for understanding the history of the United States.

Whether we accept or reject these myths ultimately determines the kind of history we understand the US to have. This is not a trivial question - just as we look to the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence to understand our rights, those involved in politics have often looked to the past to determine what rights they deemed Indigenous people to have. At its worst, these historical distortions have been used to justify dispossession, removal, and worse.

And while being able to recognize these myths is important, being able to deconstruct and debunk them when they are invoked is necessary to counteract their continued harmful influence in the present. Our ability to engage in critical historical thinking is what enables us to reason with the past in this way and make these arguments when necessary. This skills are sometimes expressed as the “five Cs” of historical analysis, which will be introduced in due course.
