Section 3, Los Comanches:

> _American and National Identity_ (_NAT_) (APUSH Theme 1)
> This focuses on how and why definitions of American and national identity and values have developed among the diverse and changing population of North America as well as on related topics, such as citizenship, constitutionalism, foreign policy, assimilation, and American exceptionalism.

Arguably, nowhere is the concept of American identity more thoroughly tested and challenged than in the Southwest borderlands. Historian, Andrés Reséndez writes of the fluidity of national identity while living at the intersection of multiple Indigenous groups, as well as the Mexican and US states:

> At the frontier, choosing one’s [national] identity could constitute an exciting business opportunity, a bold political statement, and at times it was simply a matter of survival. Not only did Mexicans become Americans, but the reverse trajectory was also possible. (Reséndez, 2004; 2)

Viewed from this lens, we begin see why the Southwest’s shift from the hands of Mexico to the US might reflect not only an imbalance in military might, but a fundamental change in national ideology for individuals on the ground. Moreover, what about the individuals who fall out of such a narrow framing of identity? How neatly do concepts of American identity apply to the “father of Texas,” _Stephen F. Austin_, a former US citizen who would become a Mexican national and “pledge allegiance to the Mexican constitution,” all the while, actively encouraging American settlement in Texas, sowing the seeds of independence and statehood (Reséndez, 2004; 2).

Despite it being a key theme of the course, the College Board never goes so far as to as to define or suggest what the content of American identity might be or include. For such an apparently important concept (and with significance that has been hotly contested [include reference to 2016 curriculum changes]), it is left frustratingly vague. Most often, this is left open, in terms of relative change or variation, for example:

> **KC-3.2.III.ii** New forms of national culture developed in the United States alongside continued regional variations.

Understanding the dynamics of national and cultural identity in the American Southwest, where some people still identify as Comanche to this day, is critical to defining the contours of who is, is not, and might be American. At a basic level, exploring these questions is a way of discovering what American identity means, fundamentally.
