I embarked on this project inspired by the writing of Pekka Hämäläinen, a historian whose 2008 book, _The Comanche Empire_, recovers a surprising history of an Indigenous people called the Comanches, or Nʉmʉnʉʉ, in their own language. Hämäläinen writes of the Comanches not merely resisting, but dominating colonists - exploiting technologies of war like horses and firearms to extract the wealth of New Mexico and Texas, and building an empire on the plains that lasted a century and half.

I remember first reading Hämäläinen for a history course. I was shocked. As a former student of the College Board’s AP US History (APUSH) course, I had known of Spanish, French, and British empires in North America; I had even heard the United States and Mexico called empires. And yet, the history I had been taught made no room for Indigenous empires. To my mind, Indigenous people existed, sometimes resisted, receded, and disappeared [Treuer here?]. I was, of course, grossly mistaken.

What I had taken to be my knowledge of history, was in fact my knowledge of _a_ history. Out of the vast well of knowledge and facts from the country’s past, my education emphasized a particular national narrative of the United States, narrowly focused inwardly on a group of people who called themselves American and a state which grew to be a bicoastal, transcontinental country. No doubt, this is an amazing and compelling history. Indeed, the Mexican Cession in 1848, which brought the contiguous states very near their modern borders, occurred a mere 60 years after the ratification of the Constitution. That one person in an average lifetime could witness such a development seemed miraculous - and yet inevitable from the perspective of the present, surrounded by maps of those borders on t-shirts, bumper stickers, and even weather reports [map as logo citation].

And yet, this is not the only history of the United States. Expansion was not inevitable, nor was it miraculous. Indigenous peoples were decisive in shaping the course of the United States’ development. They continuously adapted to the changing geopolitics of North America - and while that history involves much suffering, it also demonstrates resilience, survival, and thriving [Treuer].
In some ways, arguing for the importance of Indigenous representation in history curricula is difficult because (in a rather circular way) they have been so effectively removed from those historical spaces already. Studies of K-12 standards frequently find them to be “painfully one sided” and to “relegate the importance and presence of Indigenous Peoples to the distant past.” (Shear, et al., 2015; 68, 89).

Writing in 2006, Frances Rains suggests:

“It may be really safe to learn about generically regional Indian life before Columbus, and one can ‘feel good’ about learning that. But that was more than 500 years ago” (Rains, 2006; 150).
