## Removal

To get a sense of removal in its historical context, watch the following video from the National Museum of the American Indian. See if you can identify examples of how the _Five Myths_ (hover over to view) were invoked to justify dispossession. See what I came up with below.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/if-BOZgWZPE" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br/>
<details><summary>Example 1 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
At 3:50 we hear a quote from Andrew Jackson. Jackson held deeply racist views of Indigenous peoples, generalizing them as unintelligent, amoral, and non-industrious. Jackson did not recognize the societies of Indigenous peoples as civilized, denigrating the different social, cultural, and political structures which characterized them. John Marshall, too, refers to Indigenous peoples as savages, likewise implying that they were “uncivilized” (4:00). This is an example of Myth #1.
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 2 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
At 4:04, we hear the argument recounted “It’s important in the great american mythology to describe the Americas as wilderness. Because, if it’s wilderness, there’s really nobody to dispossess.” This is an example of the myth of free land and the uncivilized frontier Myth #4. Note how the notion of wilderness follows from and is related to Myth #1.
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>Example 3 (click to show)</summary>
<p>
At 4:57, we hear that some people believed that the US was destined to stretch across North America, or even that it was “God’s will.” This is an example of Manifest Destiny, Myth #3.
</p>
</details>
<br/>
