## Rethinking the Frontier 

_Does it make sense to apply the concept of the American Frontier to the history of Georgia?_ As a space situated between Anglo-American and Indigenous societies and an early grounds for US expansion, it certainly appears to fit the formal definition. If the history of Georgia contradicts our expectations about what the frontier should look like, perhaps we ought to rethink what we mean by the concept.

As for my answer, I would say yes and no. Removal of the Cherokee and Muskogee peoples from Georgia laid bare the huge state apparatus which made land “free” for settlers. Far from the exception, removal demonstrated a rule of the frontier - that it required an enormous concentration of state administrative and military power to create and maintain (Faragher, 1994; 234). It likewise exposed the violence, white supremacy, and anti-democratic values of expansion. It subverted white stereotypes of Cherokees and others, who organized politically and militarily to resist encroachment and grow their nation, demonstrating their stewardship of their land and unique territoriality.

In these ways, the history of white settlement in Georgia is incompatible with Turner’s view of the frontier, an individualized wilderness awaiting civilization, and the _Five Myths_. Nonetheless, the same processes at work in Georgia can be seen as merely the dress rehearsal for the brutal conquest which would occur later in the west. As we will see, Cherokees were far from the only Indigenous people to defy white stereotypes and myths.
