## Rethinking US History 

Understanding the horrific nature of removal and its role in shaping US history, it’s hard to imagine how this era remains relatively unknown to many, especially compared to the founding or subsequent Civil War. The _Five Myths_ offer a hint.

* The central claim used to overlook removal is _Myth #5_. If the history of Indigenous peoples is unnecessary to a foundational understanding of US history, it can be pushed aside to make way for other content. 
* However, proponents of this view must have a substitute for explaining the course of that history. In place of Indigenous peoples, we find _Myth #4_, Turner’s frontier thesis. If the world beyond US territory was mere wilderness, expansion is not only justified, but natural. Rather than history, expansion becomes a mere fact of geography. 
* Paired with Manifest Destiny, _Myth #3_, Indigenous history can be explained as a mere “alternative” narrative, with little bearing on the course of national events. Meanwhile, narratives of inevitable decline explain the absence of Indigenous peoples from these histories. 
* If, by susceptibility to disease, or an inability to adapt, Indigenous peoples were simply doomed from the moment of contact (narratives both amply disproved by the Cherokee Nation and others throughout history) the United States’ role in their histories is merely tangential. 
* The frontier myth necessarily requires accepting the denigration of Indigenous humanity and civilization. Wilderness must be uncivilized, which requires the imagination of a timeless, singular, primitive Indigenous population, _Myth #1_. 

Removal east of the Mississippi was only an early step toward the settler-colonialism that would define the 19th century in US history. In the next section, we will come to understand how another group, the Comanches, resisted the same fate.
