## Examining Turner

However, careful readers will notice that Turner’s _frontier thesis_ (hover to view) is closely related to one of our _Five Myths_. Embedded within the thesis are statements about who mattered in US history, and what the process of expansion looked like. Consider the following questions, then see how I would answer them.
<br/>

<details><summary>What does Turner’s thesis imply about the role of Indigenous peoples in US history? (click to show)</summary>
<p>
In my view, Turner’s language completely ignores the very existence of of Indigenous peoples. The use of the phrase “free land” seems to imply either that the west was devoid of human society, or not sufficiently developed to be considered in use. At worst, this erases Indigenous peoples entirely, or demotes them to a status of sub-human. At best, it is profoundly ignorant of the ways in which Indigenous peoples interacted with their environments and the land they lived on. 
</p>
</details>
<details><summary>What does Turner imply about the process of US expansion? (click to show)</summary>
<p>
Turner’s use of the passive voice (“its continual recession”) seems to suggest that US expansion was a natural process. Taken with Turner’s erasure of Indigenous peoples, this language obscures the systemic violence and coercion needed to obtain the supposedly free land.
</p>
</details>
<br/>
Critiquing Turner is a tradition nearly as old as his writing itself. As early as 1960, historians referred to the "blood-drenched field" of the frontier thesis (Bogue, 1960; 21). However, we still see remnants of the myth in the way we talk about the past.
